[blog] added blog post on REST API (#123)
JankariTech/blog: src/assets/RestApi/rest-api.md

---
title: Basics of REST API with Examples
authorName: Prajwol Amatya
authorAvatar: https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/de64e53c0e2cb393dd0d14ffdd53058ee9c607b35e366dd392425bd1b95a034c?size=256
authorLink: https://github.com/prajwolamatya
createdAt: April 16, 2024
tags: rest, api, rest api, python, flask
banner: https://blog.jankaritech.com/src/assets/RestApi/images/rest-api-banner.png
---

Within the field of web development, APIs, or application programming interfaces, are essential for facilitating communication across various software components. Because of its simplicity, scalability, and statelessness, REST (Representational State Transfer) APIs stand out among the other types of APIs. In this blog, we will dive into basics of building a REST API.

## What is a REST API?

> REST, or Representational State Transfer, serves as an architectural approach for creating networked apps. It operates via a stateless client-server communication system. In this model, clients and servers exchange representations of resources identified by URLs. Access is facilitated through standard HTTP methods such as GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, and others.

Author: Maybe write as `REST (Representational State Transfer)`, just to mention what REST stands for.

> REST, or Representational State Transfer, serves as an architectural approach for creating networked apps. It operates via a stateless client-server communication system. In this model, clients and servers exchange representations of resources identified by URLs. Access is facilitated through standard HTTP methods such as GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, and others.

Reviewer: both ways of writing this are correct. However if you write it in the way @SagarGi suggested, an empty space is needed before the bracket: 
REST (Representational State Transfer)

### Key Principles of REST
1. **Stateless**: Every client request to the server must include all necessary information for comprehension and processing. The server should not retain any data about the client's latest HTTP request.

2. **Client-Server Architecture**: The client handles the user interface and experience, while the server manages request processing and resource management.

3. **Cacheable**: Responses from the server can be cached by the client. This can improve performance by reducing the load on the server and decreasing client-server interactions.

> 4. **Uniform Interface**: Clients can cache responses from the server, enhancing performance by reducing the server load and minimizing client-server interactions.

Author: I mistakenly pasted the paraphrased version of point 3 on point 4. :smile: Thanks for noticing :+1: . I will update.

## REST API Architecture

> REST APIs utilize a client-server architecture, communicating over HTTP. The client sends requests to the server, which processes them and sends back responses. Communication is stateless, requiring each client request to contain all necessary information for processing.

Author: Updated the content in the preceding section.

![REST API](/src/assets/RestApi/images/rest_api.png)

### Components of REST API Architecture

> - **Resources**: In REST, resources are identified by URLs, representing anything that can be named and addressed, such as documents, images, temporal services, collections of other resources, non-virtual objects, and more.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Resources**: In REST, resources are identified by URIs, representing anything that can be named and addressed, such as documents, images, temporal services, collections of other resources, non-virtual objects, and more.
```

- **Representations**: Resources are represented in a format easily understood by both client and server, commonly JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) or XML (eXtensible Markup Language).

### Implementing REST API
Now, lets start to build a REST API. Before we start, make sure you have Python installed on your system. You can download Python from [python.org](https://www.python.org/). We will also need Flask, which you can install using pip:
```bash
pip install Flask
```

We will build a REST API for managing a list of tasks. Each task will have a title and a status indicating whether it's completed or not.

1. Create a new Python file: `app.py`

2. Import Flask and initialize the app:
```python
from flask import Flask, jsonify, request

app = Flask(__name__)
```

3. Define the data structure for our tasks. For simplicity, we'll use a list of dictionaries:
```python
tasks = [
    {"id": 1, "title": "Buy groceries", "completed": False},
    {"id": 2, "title": "Clean the house", "completed": True}
]
```

> ### GET Request

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### GET Requests
```

To retrieve all tasks, implement a route that handles GET requests:
```python
@app.route("/tasks", methods=["GET"])
def get_tasks():
    return jsonify({"tasks": tasks})
```

To retrieve a specific task:
```python
@app.route("/tasks/<int:task_id>", methods=["GET"])
def get_task(task_id):
    task = next((item for item in tasks if item["id"] == task_id), None)
    if task is None:
        return jsonify({"error": "Task not found"}), 404

>     return jsonify({"task": task})

Reviewer 3: some explanation about what this code does would be good, same for the other examples

    tasks.append(new_task)
    return jsonify({"task": new_task}), 201
```

### PUT Request
To update a task, implement a route that handles PUT requests:
```python
@app.route("/tasks/<int:task_id>", methods=["PUT"])
def update_task(task_id):
    task = next((item for item in tasks if item["id"] == task_id), None)
    if task is None:
        return jsonify({"error": "Task not found"}), 404
    task.update(request.get_json())
    return jsonify({"task": task})
```

### DELETE Request
To delete a task, implement a route that handles DELETE requests:
```python
@app.route("/tasks/<int:task_id>", methods=["DELETE"])
def delete_tasks(task_id):
    task = next((item for item in tasks if item["id"] == task_id), None)
    if task is None:
        return jsonify({"error": "Task not found"}), 404
    tasks.remove(task)
    return jsonify({"result": "Task deleted"})
```

### Running the Application
To run your application, add the following line:
```python
if __name__ == "__main__":
    app.run(debug=True)
```

Then open your terminal and run the following command form your project directory:
```bash
python3 app.py
```
Your REST API is now up and running on `http://127.0.0.1:5000`

> ## Testing your API

Reviewer 3: what about showing how the not-happy-path work

---
title: Basics of REST API with Examples
authorName: Prajwol Amatya
authorAvatar: https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/de64e53c0e2cb393dd0d14ffdd53058ee9c607b35e366dd392425bd1b95a034c?size=256
authorLink: https://github.com/prajwolamatya
createdAt: April 16, 2024
tags: rest, api, rest api, python, flask
banner: https://blog.jankaritech.com/src/assets/RestApi/images/rest-api-banner.png
---

> Within the field of web development, APIs, or application programming interfaces, are essential for facilitating communication across various software components. Because of its simplicity, scalability, and statelessness, REST (Representational State Transfer) APIs stand out among the other types of APIs. In this blog, we will dive into basics of building a REST API.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Within the field of web development, APIs (Application Programming Interfaces), are essential for facilitating communication across various software components. Because of its simplicity, scalability, and statelessness, REST (Representational State Transfer) APIs stand out among the other types of APIs. In this blog, we will dive into basics of building a REST API.
```
May be this one look good

> ## What is a REST API?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### What is a REST API?
```

> REST (Representational State Transfer), serves as an architectural approach for creating networked apps. It operates via a stateless client-server communication system. In this model, clients and servers exchange representations of resources identified by URLs. Access is facilitated through standard HTTP methods such as GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, and others.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
REST API serves as an architectural approach for creating networked apps. It operates via a stateless client-server communication system. In this model, clients and servers exchange representations of resources identified by URLs. Access is facilitated through standard HTTP methods such as GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, and others.
```
Since the full form of REST has already been provided above, there is no need to repeat it again.

### Key Principles of REST

> 1. **Stateless**: Every client request to the server must include all necessary information for comprehension and processing. The server should not retain any data about the client's latest HTTP request.
> 
> 2. **Client-Server Architecture**: The client handles the user interface and experience, while the server manages request processing and resource management.
> 
> 3. **Cacheable**: Clients can cache responses from the server, enhancing performance by reducing the server load and minimizing client-server interactions.
> 
> 4. **Uniform Interface**: The API has a consistent interface, which simplifies the architecture and enhances visibility of interactions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**1. Stateless**: Every client request to the server must include all necessary information for comprehension and processing. The server should not retain any data about the client's latest HTTP request.

 **2. Client-Server Architecture**: The client handles the user interface and experience, while the server manages request processing and resource management.

**3. Cacheable**: Clients can cache responses from the server, enhancing performance by reducing the server load and minimizing client-server interactions.

**4. Uniform Interface**: The API has a consistent interface, which simplifies the architecture and enhances visibility of interactions.
```

Author: IMO either will be fine.

## REST API Architecture
REST APIs utilize a client-server architecture, communicating over HTTP. The client sends requests to the server, which processes them and sends back responses. Communication is stateless, requiring each client request to contain all necessary information for processing.

> ![REST API](/src/assets/RestApi/images/rest_api.png)

Author: Yes I drew the block diagram by myself. That is the reason I haven't mentioned the source of the diagram.

### Components of REST API Architecture
- **Resources**: In REST, resources are identified by URLs, representing anything that can be named and addressed, such as documents, images, temporal services, collections of other resources, non-virtual objects, and more.

- **HTTP Methods**: REST APIs utilize standard HTTP methods for operations on resources. Common methods include GET (to retrieve a resource), POST (to create a new resource), PUT (to update a resource), and DELETE (to remove a resource).

> - **Representations**: Resources are represented in a format easily understood by both client and server, commonly JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) or XML (eXtensible Markup Language).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **Representations**: Resources are represented in a format easily understood by both client and server, commonly JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) or XML (Extensible Markup Language).
```

> ### Implementing REST API

Author: Should be H2 tag. :+1:

> Now, lets start to build a REST API. Before we start, make sure you have Python installed on your system. You can download Python from [python.org](https://www.python.org/). We will also need Flask, which you can install using pip:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now, let's start to build a REST API. Before we start, make sure you have Python installed on your system. You can download Python from [python.org](https://www.python.org/). We will also need Flask, which you can install using pip:
```

> Now, lets start to build a REST API. Before we start, make sure you have Python installed on your system. You can download Python from [python.org](https://www.python.org/). We will also need Flask, which you can install using pip:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now, lets start to build a REST API. Before we start, make sure you have Python installed on your system. You can download Python from [python.org](https://www.python.org/downloads). We will also need Flask, which you can install using pip:
```

```bash
pip install Flask
```

We will build a REST API for managing a list of tasks. Each task will have a title and a status indicating whether it's completed or not.

1. Create a new Python file: `app.py`

2. Import Flask and initialize the app:
```python
from flask import Flask, jsonify, request

app = Flask(__name__)
```

3. Define the data structure for our tasks. For simplicity, we'll use a list of dictionaries:
```python
tasks = [
    {"id": 1, "title": "Buy groceries", "completed": False},
    {"id": 2, "title": "Clean the house", "completed": True}
]
```

### GET Requests

> To retrieve all tasks, implement a route that handles GET requests:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- To retrieve all tasks, implement a route that handles GET requests:
- To retrieve a specific task
```

it would be better to clarify the distinction between the two methods for the GET request by summarizing them as separate points or other way you prefer? This would enhance clarity

```python
@app.route("/tasks", methods=["GET"])
def get_tasks():

>     return jsonify({"tasks": tasks})

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    return jsonify({"tasks": tasks}), 200
```

```
This method will return all the tasks in JSON format.

To retrieve a specific task:
```python
@app.route("/tasks/<int:task_id>", methods=["GET"])
def get_task(task_id):
    task = next((item for item in tasks if item["id"] == task_id), None)
    if task is None:
        return jsonify({"error": "Task not found"}), 404

>     return jsonify({"task": task})

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    return jsonify({"task": task}), 200
```

```

> We use the id of the tasks to identify a specific task since id is unique for every tasks. This method will look for the task with provided id and return the task with the matching id. If the task with the provided id is not found, it will return the error in JSON response indicating the task was not found, with status code `404`.

Reviewer 4: if this [comment](https://github.com/JankariTech/blog/pull/123/files#r1567660202) is valid 
then,
include in explanation also

### PUT Request
To update a task, implement a route that handles PUT requests:
```python
@app.route("/tasks/<int:task_id>", methods=["PUT"])
def update_task(task_id):
    task = next((item for item in tasks if item["id"] == task_id), None)
    if task is None:
        return jsonify({"error": "Task not found"}), 404
    task.update(request.get_json())
    return jsonify({"task": task})
```
We use the id of the task that we want to update. First, it will look whether the task with provided id exists or not. If the task doesn't exist then it will return the error in JSON response indicating the task was not found, with status code `404`. If the task exists then `task.update(request.get_json())` will update the task with the new data from the request body and returns the updated task as a JSON response.

### DELETE Request
To delete a task, implement a route that handles DELETE requests:
```python
@app.route("/tasks/<int:task_id>", methods=["DELETE"])
def delete_tasks(task_id):
    task = next((item for item in tasks if item["id"] == task_id), None)
    if task is None:
        return jsonify({"error": "Task not found"}), 404
    tasks.remove(task)

>     return jsonify({"result": "Task deleted"})

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    return jsonify({"result": "Task deleted"}), <status_code>
```

Author: It will take the default status code for the specific methods if status code is not provided. It will explicitly set the status code if provided.

```

> We use the id of the task that we want to delete. First, it will look whether the task with provided id exists or not. If the task doesn't exist then it will return the error in JSON response indicating the task was not found, with status code `404`. If the task exists then it will remove that specific task from the list of task and returns a JSON repsonse indicating task was deleted successfully.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We use the id of the task that we want to delete. First, it will look whether the task with the provided id exists or not. If the task doesn't exist then it will return the error in JSON response indicating the task was not found, with status code `404`. If the task exists then it will remove that specific task from the list of tasks and return a JSON response indicating the task was deleted successfully.
```

Author: > Maybe explain the response more in depth in its own section. I guess having some understanding of the response object is useful for the user anyway and would correspond to request types

I wasn't explaining the response here, just explaining what function does and returns in the response. But I have now updated the explanation part as per the above comments.

### Running the Application
To run your application, add the following line:
```python
if __name__ == "__main__":
    app.run(debug=True)
```

Then open your terminal and run the following command form your project directory:
```bash
python3 app.py
```
Your REST API is now up and running on `http://127.0.0.1:5000`

## Testing your API

> You can test your API using tools like Postman or cURL.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can test your API using tools like Postman or CURL.
```

### List all tasks

> You can use the following curl command to list all the avaliable tasks:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can use the following cURL command to list all the available tasks:
```

```bash
curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks
```
Expected Result:
```json

> {
>   "tasks": [
>     {
>       "completed": false,
>       "id": 1,
>       "title": "Buy groceries"
>     },
>     {
>       "completed": true,
>       "id": 2,
>       "title": "Clean the house"
>     }
>   ]
> }

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{
  "tasks": [
    {
      "id": 1,
      "title": "Buy groceries"
      "completed": false,
    },
    {
      "id": 2,
      "title": "Clean the house"
      "completed": true,
    }
  ]
}
```

Doesn't the order in which the tasks are returned will be the same as the order in which they are defined in the tasks list

Author: This is because of the `jsonify` function which doesn't maintain the order of the keys of the original dictionary. If we want to maintain the order we need extra codes and since, this is just the basics for the REST API, I think adding extra codes to maintain the order of the keys in response won't be necessary.

```

### List a specific task

> To retrieve a specific task by its ID, you can use the following curl command, replacing `<task_id>` with the id of the task you want to retrieve:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To retrieve a specific task by its ID, you can use the following cURL command, replacing `<task_id>` with the id of the task you want to retrieve:
```

```bash
curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks/<task_id>
```

> Example:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Example:
let's take id=1,
then
```

Reviewer: good suggestion to write something that comments the code example, but write something more descriptive than just "then"

```bash
curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks/1
```
Expected Result:
```json
{
  "task": {
    "completed": false,
    "id": 1,
    "title": "Buy groceries"
  }
}
```

### Create a New Task

> To create a new task, you can use following curl command, replacing `<task_data>` with the JSON data for the new task:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To create a new task, you can use the following cURL command, replacing `<task_data>` with the JSON data for the new task:
```

> ```bash
> curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '<json_data>' http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks
> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```bash
curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '<json_data>' http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks
```
```

Expected Result?

Reviewer: Since it is a general example maybe write more generally what will be returned (JSON task object?)

Author: > ```
> 
> Expected Result?
> ```

It is just below.

> Example:

Reviewer: It's helpful for the reader to comment on this specific example, in particular the task object that is added (structure, maybe make anchor reference to the section where you wrote more about this)

```bash
curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"id":3,"task":"Finish the report","completed":false}' http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks
```
Expected Result:
```json
{
  "task": {
    "completed": false,
    "id": 3,
    "task": "Finish the report"
  }
}
```

### Update a task

> To update an existing task, use the following curl command, replacing `<task_id>` with the id of the task, and `<updated_data>` with the JSON data you want to update:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To update an existing task, use the following cURL command, replacing `<task_id>` with the id of the task, and `<updated_data>` with the JSON data you want to update:
```

```bash
curl -X PUT -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '<updated_data>' http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks/<task_id>
```
Example:
```bash
curl -X PUT -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"completed":true}' http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks/3

> ```

Reviewer 4: better to explain which data we are going to update

Reviewer: If you apply some micro story telling to your examples, it is more fun for the reader. 
Example: when/afer the user has finished the task, it can be updated using the update task method

Expected Result:
```json
{
  "task": {
    "completed": true,
    "id": 3,
    "task": "Finish the report"
  }
}
```

### Delete a task

> To delete a task, use the following curl command, replacing `<task_id>` with the id of the task you want to delete:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To delete a task, use the following cURL command, replacing `<task_id>` with the id of the task you want to delete:
```

```bash
curl -X DELETE http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks/<task_id>
```
Example:
```bash
curl -X DELETE http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks/3

> ```

Reviewer 4: better to explain which id we are going to delete

Expected Result:
```json
{
  "result": "Task deleted"
}
```

> Let's try to retrieve a task which doesn't exist in the list of task. For instance, we just deleted task with id = 3. Now, let's try to retrieve the task with id = 3 and see the result.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Let's try to retrieve a task that doesn't exist in the list of tasks. For instance, we just deleted a task with id = 3. Now, let's try to retrieve the task with id = 3 and see the result.
```

```bash
curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks/3
```
Expected result:
```json
{
  "error": "Task not found"
}
```
We see that the JSON response returns the error `Task not found`, which indicates that the task doesn't exist in the list of tasks.

> Now, let's look into the cases with invalid requests:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now, let's look into the cases with invalid requests:
```
better to make separate topics
may be
### Troubleshoot

> 1. **Invalid endpoint**:

Reviewer: I think so far you haven't really written anything about endpoints at all... Since your blog seems to be aimed at beginners, it's would be better to introduce what's an endpoint earlier in your text

> Try to get all the tasks with following curl command:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Try to get all the tasks with following curl command:
```

same as https://github.com/JankariTech/blog/pull/123#discussion_r1567749333

```bash
curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/task
```
Here, we have used `task` instead of `tasks` in our endpoint, which makes our endpoint invalid. With this request we get the following error with `404` status code:
```console
The requested URL was not found on the server. If you entered the URL manually please check your spelling and try again.
```

> 2. **Invalid JSON data**:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**2. Invalid JSON data**:
```

Try to add a new task with invalid JSON data:
```bash
curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"id":3,task:"Finish the report","completed":false}' http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks
```

> Here, the JSON data in request body is invalid as the key `task` is not enclosed in double quotes. With this request we get the following error with status code `400`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Here, the JSON data in the request body is invalid as the key `task` is not enclosed in double quotes. With this request, we get the following error with status code `400`.
```

> Here, the JSON data in request body is invalid as the key `task` is not enclosed in double quotes. With this request we get the following error with status code `400`.

Reviewer: Before going into specific examples of invalid data, maybe mention some of the most common syntax and structure errors...

```console
Failed to decode JSON object: Expecting property name enclosed in double quotes: line 1 column 9 (char 8)
```

> ## Conclusion

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Conclusion
```
may need

Reviewer: The conclusion should summarize the whole article (short summery of what you have learned), therefore H2 is suitable. H3 would mean that this is only a summary of whatever was the last H2 before this...

> In this blog, we've explored the basics of REST APIs and how to implement them using Python Flask. This simple example demonstrates the power and flexibility of REST APIs in building scalable and maintainable web applications.

Reviewer: In addition, you could point the reader to next steps in the learning journey and/or if you're planning to write more on this subject, make a teaser for upcoming stuff. 

And it would also be nice for the reader to get access to the code samples of the completed example.

Plus, it's also good practice to add references of your sources somewhere at the end of your blog (e.g. image source)

---
title: Understanding REST APIs - A Comprehensive Guide with Practical Example
authorName: Prajwol Amatya
authorAvatar: https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/de64e53c0e2cb393dd0d14ffdd53058ee9c607b35e366dd392425bd1b95a034c?size=256
authorLink: https://github.com/prajwolamatya
createdAt: April 16, 2024
tags: rest, api, rest api, python, flask
banner: https://blog.jankaritech.com/src/assets/RestApi/images/rest-api-banner.png
---

Within the field of web development, APIs (Application Programming Interface) are essential for facilitating communication across various software components. Because of its simplicity, scalability, and statelessness, REST (Representational State Transfer) APIs stand out among the other types of APIs. In this blog, we will dive into basics of building a REST API.

## What is a REST API?

> REST is a framework that outlines a collection of guidelines for building web services. A REST API offers a straightforward and adaptable method to interact with web services without the need for any processing. REST is often favored for its lower bandwidth usage, simplicity, and flexibility, making it better suited for internet applications. REST is utilized to retrieve or transmit data from a web service with all interactions through a REST API occurring via HTTP requests.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we can say REST is a framework but an architecture style. Ref:https://ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/rest_arch_style.htm

## REST API Architecture
REST APIs utilize a client-server architecture, communicating over HTTP. The client sends requests to the server, which processes them and sends back responses. Communication is stateless, requiring each client request to contain all necessary information for processing.

![REST API Archiecture](/src/assets/RestApi/images/rest_api.png)

### Components of REST API Architecture
- **Resources**: In REST, resources are identified by URIs, representing anything that can be named and addressed, such as documents, images, temporal services, collections of other resources, non-virtual objects, and more.

- **HTTP Methods**: REST APIs utilize standard HTTP methods for operations on resources. Common methods include GET (to retrieve a resource), POST (to create a new resource), PUT (to update a resource), and DELETE (to remove a resource).

- **Representations**: Resources are represented in a format easily understood by both client and server, commonly JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) or XML (eXtensible Markup Language).

## Understanding Endpoints in REST API

> Endpoints are the points of interaction between the client and the server in a RESTful API. Each endpoint is associated with a specific URI where an API can be accessed, and it defines a specific URI at which the resource can be accessed or manipulated. Endpoints are crucial for REST APIs as they provide a structured and standardized way for clients to interact with the API's resources.

Reviewer: The sentence above is a bit confusing to me. You write above "...where an API can be accessed". Since you're talking about a specific URI, I guess it's a specific function or method of the API that you're referring to?

Author: I might have made mistake while paraphrasing. Updated according to https://www.sensedia.com/pillar/components-of-an-api-endpoint-resources-methods#:~:text=An%20endpoint%20is%20a%20specific,resource%20offered%20by%20the%20API.

**- Resource Representation:** The data returned by an endpoint is typically in a structured format, such as JSON or XML, which represents the resource or resources associated with the endpoint.

## Implementing a REST API
Now, let's start to build a REST API. Before we start, make sure you have Python installed on your system. You can download Python from [python.org](https://www.python.org/downloads). We will also need Flask, which you can install using pip:
```bash
pip install Flask
```

We will build a REST API for managing a list of tasks. Each task will have a title and a status indicating whether it's completed or not.

1. Create a new Python file: `app.py`

2. Import Flask and initialize the app:
```python
from flask import Flask, jsonify, request

app = Flask(__name__)
```

3. Define the data structure for our tasks. For simplicity, we'll use a list of dictionaries:
```python
tasks = [
    {"id": 1, "title": "Buy groceries", "completed": False},
    {"id": 2, "title": "Clean the house", "completed": True}
]
```

### GET Requests

> A GET request is used to retrieve data from a server. We can get all the avaliable data or a specific data using a GET request.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A GET request is used to retrieve data from a server. We can get all the available data or specific data using a GET request.
```

- `methods=["GET]` specifies that this route should respond to the HTTP GET requests. This means that when a client sends a GET request to the `/tasks` URL, Flask will call the associated function.
- `get_tasks()` function will return a JSON response containing all tasks.
- `jsonify({"tasks": tasks})` is a Flask function that converts the Python dictionary `{"tasks": tasks}` into a JSON response.

- To retrieve a specific task:
```python
@app.route("/tasks/<int:task_id>", methods=["GET"])
def get_task(task_id):
    task = next((item for item in tasks if item["id"] == task_id), None)
    if task is None:
        return jsonify({"error": "Task not found"}), 404
    return jsonify({"task": task}), 200
```
- `@app.route` binds a URL pattern `/tasks/<int:task_id>` to the function that follows it.
- `<int:task_id>` is a variable part of the URL that will be captured and passed to the function as an argument.
- `methods=["GET"]` specifies that this route should respond to the HTTP GET requests. This means that when a client sends a GET request to the `tasks/<int:task_id>` URL, Flask will call the associated function.

> - `get_task()` function will take `task_id` as argument that is extracted from `/tasks/<int:task_id>` URL. The function will then search for a task with that ID in the `tasks` list. If a task is found, it will return the task in JSON format. If no task is found, it will return a `404` status code with an error message.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- `get_task()` function will take `task_id` as the argument that is extracted from `/tasks/<int:task_id>` URL. The function will then search for a task with that ID in the `tasks` list. If a task is found, it will return the task in JSON format. If no task is found, it will return a `404` status code with an error message.
```

- `return jsonify({"task": task})` returns a JSON response containing the task. 

### POST Request
A POST request is used to send data to a server to create a new resource. To create a new task, implement a route that handles POST requests:
```python
@app.route("/tasks", methods=["POST"])
def create_task():
    new_task = request.get_json()
    tasks.append(new_task)
    return jsonify({"task": new_task}), 201
```
- `@app.route` binds a URL pattern `/tasks` to the function that follows it.
- `methods=["POST"]` specifies that this route should respond to the HTTP POST requests. This means when a client sends a POST request to the `/tasks` URL, Flask will call the associated function.
- `request.get_json()` is a Flask function that parses the incoming request data as JSON. This function is used to extract the JSON payload sent by the client in the POST request.
- `create_task()` function will parse the JSON payload, add the new task to the `tasks` list, and return a JSON response containing the newly created task. The status code `201` indicates that the task was successfully created.

> - `tasks.append(new_task)` appends the new_task dictionary to the tasks list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `tasks.append(new_task)` appends the `new_task` dictionary to the tasks list.
```
I think it's a bit clearer if you put the name of the dictionary into quotation marks as you've done above for the list

- `jsonify({"task": new_task})` is a Flask function that converts the `new_task` dictionary into a JSON response. This response includes the newly created task.

### PUT Request
A PUT request is used to update an existing resource on a server. To update a task, implement a route that handles PUT requests:
```python
@app.route("/tasks/<int:task_id>", methods=["PUT"])
def update_task(task_id):
    task = next((item for item in tasks if item["id"] == task_id), None)
    if task is None:
        return jsonify({"error": "Task not found"}), 404
    task.update(request.get_json())
    return jsonify({"task": task}), 201
```
- `@app.route` binds a URL pattern `/tasks/<int:task_id>` to the function that follows it.
- `<int:task_id>` is a variable part of the URL that will be captured and passed to the function as an argument.
- `methods=["PUT"]` specifies that this route should respond to the HTTP PUT requests. This means that when a client sends a PUT request to the `/tasks/<int:task_id>` URL, Flask will call the associated function.

> - `update_task()` function will take `task_id` as argument that is extracted from `/tasks/<int:task_id>` URL. The function will then search for a task with that ID in the tasks list. If a task is found, it will update the task with the new data provided in the request and return the updated task in JSON format. If no task is found, it will return a `404` status code with an error message.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- `update_task()` function will take `task_id` as the argument that is extracted from `/tasks/<int:task_id>` URL. The function will then search for a task with that ID in the tasks list. If a task is found, it will update the task with the new data provided in the request and return the updated task in JSON format. If no task is found, it will return a `404` status code with an error message.
```

- `return jsonify({"task": task})` returns a JSON response containing the updated task.

### DELETE Request
A DELETE request is used to remove a resource from a server. To delete a task, implement a route that handles DELETE requests:
```python
@app.route("/tasks/<int:task_id>", methods=["DELETE"])
def delete_tasks(task_id):
    task = next((item for item in tasks if item["id"] == task_id), None)
    if task is None:
        return jsonify({"error": "Task not found"}), 404
    tasks.remove(task)
    return jsonify({"result": "Task deleted"}), 200
```
- `@app.route` binds a URL pattern `/tasks/<int:task_id>` to the function that follows it.
- `<int:task_id>` is a variable part of the URL that will be captured and passed to the function as an argument.
- `methods=["DELETE"]` specifies that this route should respond to the HTTP DELETE requests. This means that when a client sends a DELETE request to the `/tasks/<int:task_id>` URL, Flask will call the associated function.

> - `delete_task()` function will take `task_id` as argument that is extracted from `/tasks/<int:task_id>` URL. The function will then search for a task with that ID in the `tasks` list. If a task is found, it will remove the task from the list and return a JSON response indicating that the task was deleted. If no task is found, it will return a `404` status code with an error message.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- `delete_task()` function will take `task_id` as the argument that is extracted from `/tasks/<int:task_id>` URL. The function will then search for a task with that ID in the `tasks` list. If a task is found, it will remove the task from the list and return a JSON response indicating that the task was deleted. If no task is found, it will return a `404` status code with an error message.
```

- `tasks.remove(task)` removes the task from the `tasks` list.
- `return jsonify({"result": "Task deleted"})` returns a JSON response indicating that the task was successfully deleted.

### Running the Application
To run your application, add the following line:
```python
if __name__ == "__main__":
    app.run(debug=True)
```

> Then open your terminal and run the following command form your project directory:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Then open your terminal and run the following command from your project directory:
```

```bash
python3 app.py
```
Your REST API is now up and running on `http://127.0.0.1:5000`

> 

Reviewer 4: Including something like the entire 'app.py' file looks like this for post requests or any request will be effective and clear for the reader.

Reviewer: or link to GitHub repo or similar?

## Testing Your API
You can test your API using tools like Postman or cURL.

> ### List All Tasks

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
###1. List All Tasks
```
Willn't it be better to numbered the points for more clarity of `testing your API` points

You can use the following cURL command to list all the avaliable tasks:
```bash
curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks
```
Expected Result:
```json
{
  "tasks": [
    {
      "completed": false,
      "id": 1,
      "title": "Buy groceries"
    },
    {
      "completed": true,
      "id": 2,
      "title": "Clean the house"
    }
  ]
}
```

### List a Specific Task
To retrieve a specific task by its ID, you can use the following cURL command, replacing `<task_id>` with the id of the task you want to retrieve:
```bash
curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks/<task_id>
```
Example:
```bash
curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks/1
```

> The `curl` command sends an HTTP GET request to `http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks/1`, retrieving the task with ID `1` from a local server.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The cURL command sends an HTTP GET request to `http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks/1`, retrieving the task with ID `1` from a local server.
```

Author: IMO the current one is fine. Just highlighting the command used in the script. If it was in documentation section then `cURL` would be nice.

    "id": 3,
    "task": "Finish the report"
  }
}
```

### 4. Update a Task
To update an existing task, use the following cURL command, replacing `<task_id>` with the id of the task, and `<updated_data>` with the JSON data you want to update:
```bash
curl -X PUT -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '<updated_data>' http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks/<task_id>
```
Example:
```bash
curl -X PUT -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"completed":true}' http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks/3
```
The `curl` command sends an HTTP PUT request with JSON data to `http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks/3`, updating the task with ID `3` to mark it as completed.

Expected Result:
```json
{
  "task": {
    "completed": true,
    "id": 3,
    "task": "Finish the report"
  }
}
```

### 5. Delete a Task
To delete a task, use the following cURL command, replacing `<task_id>` with the id of the task you want to delete:
```bash
curl -X DELETE http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks/<task_id>
```
Example:
```bash
curl -X DELETE http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks/3
```
The `curl` command sends an HTTP DELETE request to `http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks/3`, deleting the task with ID `3`.

Expected Result:
```json
{
  "result": "Task deleted"
}
```

> Let's try to retrieve a task that doesn't exist in the list of tasks. For instance, we just deleted a task with id = 3. Now, let's try to retrieve the task with id = 3 and see the result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's try to retrieve a task that doesn't exist in the list of tasks. For instance, we just deleted a task with ID = 3. Now, let's try to retrieve the task with ID = 3 and see the result.
```

```bash
curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks/3
```
Expected result:
```json
{
  "error": "Task not found"
}
```
We see that the JSON response returns the error `Task not found`, which indicates that the task doesn't exist in the list of tasks.

> ## Troubleshoot

Reviewer: maybe there is a more descriptive title for this paragraph? I think you're writing about common errors that one should avoid

Now, let's explore scenarios where API requests might fail. API requests can fail due to various reasons, including sending invalid requests. This could happen if an incorrect endpoint is used, the JSON data is invalid, or if the request is made with an unsupported HTTP method. Let's examine some instances where API requests might fail.

> **1. Invalid endpoint**:

Reviewer: check title formats in this section, see also comment above (line 168)

> Now, let's explore scenarios where API requests might fail. API requests can fail due to various reasons, including sending invalid requests. This could happen if an incorrect endpoint is used, the JSON data is invalid, or if the request is made with an unsupported HTTP method. Let's examine some instances where API requests might fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's explore scenarios where API requests might fail. API requests can fail due to various reasons, including sending invalid requests. This could happen if an incorrect endpoint is used, if the JSON data is invalid, or if the request is made with an unsupported HTTP method. Let's examine some instances where API requests might fail.
```

> Now, let's explore scenarios where API requests might fail. API requests can fail due to various reasons, including sending invalid requests. This could happen if an incorrect endpoint is used, if the JSON data is invalid, or if the request is made with an unsupported HTTP method. Let's examine some instances where API requests might fail.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Now, let's explore scenarios where API requests might fail. API requests can fail for various reasons, including sending invalid requests. This could happen if an incorrect endpoint is used, if the JSON data is invalid, or if the request is made with an unsupported HTTP method. Let's examine some instances where API requests might fail.
```

With the REST API that we built, we have the following valid API endpoints:
- `GET /tasks`: Retrieves a list of all available tasks
- `GET /tasks/<int:task_id>`: Retrieves a specific task by its ID
- `POST /tasks`: Creates a new task
- `PUT /tasks/<int:task_id>`: Updates a specific task by its ID
- `DELETE /tasks/<int:task_id>`: Deletes a specific task by its ID

> If we send an API request to any of the endpoint rather then the listed endpoints, the request will fail with an stauts code `404`. For instance, let's try to get all the tasks with following cURL command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we send an API request to any endpoint that is not listed above, the request will fail with a `404` status code. For instance, let's try to get all the tasks with following cURL command:
```

The specific article "the" is a bit confusing when speaking of something unspecific like any (inexistent) endpoint...
And "rather than" is usually used in negations, see also https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/rather%20than

```bash
curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/task
```
Here, we have used `task` instead of `tasks` in our endpoint, which makes our endpoint invalid. With this request we get the following error with `404` status code.

Expected Result:
```console

> The requested URL was not found on the server. If you entered the URL manually please check your spelling and try again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The requested URL was not found on the server. If you entered the URL manually, please check your spelling and try again.
```
not sure if the error message has a comma... grammatically it would be better to set a comma, but if that's the actual error message, don't modify it.

Author: That is the actual error message.

```

**2. Invalid JSON data**:
Invalid JSON data can lead to API request failures due to syntax or structure errors. Here are some of the most common syntax and structure errors that can occur in JSON data:

- **Missing Quotes Around Keys:** In JSON, keys must be strings, and strings are defined by enclosing them in double quotes. Omitting quotes around keys will result in invalid JSON.
Invalid:
```json
{ key: "value" }
```
Valid:
```json
{ "key": "value" }
```
- **Trailing Commas:** JSON does not allow trailing commas after the last element in an object or array. Including a comma after the last element will make the JSON invalid.
Invalid:
```json
{
  "key1": "value1",
  "key2": "value2",
}
```
Valid:
```json
{
  "key1": "value1",
  "key2": "value2"
}
```

> - **Single Quotes Instead of Double Quotes:** JSON strings must be enclosed in double quotes. Using single quotes will result in invalid JSON.

Reviewer: as a reader it would make more sense to have the errors that relate to missing and wrong type of quotes after each other and also the different errors relating to commas (trailing, missing) grouped together

```
Valid:
```json
{
  "key1": "value1",
  "key2": "value2"
}
```
- **Missing Comma Between Elements:** In JSON objects and arrays, elements must be separated by commas. Omitting a comma between elements will make the JSON invalid.
Invalid:
```json
{
  "key1": "value1"
  "key2": "value2"
}
```
Valid:
```json
{
  "key1": "value1",
  "key2": "value2"
}
```
- **Incorrect Data Types:** JSON supports several data types, including strings, numbers, objects, arrays, booleans, and null. Using an incorrect data type or a value that does not match the expected type can lead to invalid JSON.
Invlaid:
```json
{
  "key": "value",
  "number": "123"
}
```
Valid:
```json
{
  "key": "value",
  "number": 123
}
```

> Let's add a new task with invalid JSON data with missing quote around one of the keys:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Let's add a new task with invalid JSON data with a missing quote around one of the keys:
```

```bash
curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"id":3,task:"Finish the report","completed":false}' http://127.0.0.1:5000/tasks
```
Here, the JSON data in the request body is invalid as the key `task` is not enclosed in double quotes. With this request, we get the following error with status code `400`.

Expected Result:
```console
Failed to decode JSON object: Expecting property name enclosed in double quotes: line 1 column 9 (char 8)
```

**3. Unsupported HTTP method**

> When a API request is sent to an endpoint with an unsupported HTTP method, then the API request will fail with an error message `Method Not Allowed`. For example, trying to POST to an endpoint to get a specific task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a API request is sent to an endpoint with an unsupported HTTP method, then the API request will fail with an error message `Method Not Allowed`. For example, trying to POST to an endpoint to get a specific task:
```

---
title: Understanding REST APIs - A Comprehensive Guide with Practical Example
authorName: Prajwol Amatya
authorAvatar: https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/de64e53c0e2cb393dd0d14ffdd53058ee9c607b35e366dd392425bd1b95a034c?size=256
authorLink: https://github.com/prajwolamatya
createdAt: May 8, 2024
tags: rest, api, rest api, python, flask
banner: https://blog.jankaritech.com/src/assets/RestApi/images/rest-api-banner.png
---

> Within the field of web development, APIs (Application Programming Interface) are essential for facilitating communication across various software components. Because of its simplicity, scalability, and statelessness, REST (Representational State Transfer) APIs stand out among the other types of APIs. In this blog, we will dive into basics of building a REST API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within the field of web development, APIs (Application Programming Interfaces) are essential for facilitating communication across various software components. Because of its simplicity, scalability, and statelessness, REST (Representational State Transfer) APIs stand out among the other types of APIs. In this blog, we will dive into basics of building a REST API.
```

I think you need plural here

    return jsonify({"task": task}), 200

@app.route("/tasks", methods=["POST"])
def create_task():
    new_task = request.get_json()
    tasks.append(new_task)
    return jsonify({"task": new_task}), 201

@app.route("/tasks/<int:task_id>", methods=["PUT"])
def update_task(task_id):
    task = next((item for item in tasks if item["id"] == task_id), None)
    if task is None:
        return jsonify({"error": "Task not found"}), 404
    task.update(request.get_json())
    return jsonify({"task": task}), 201

@app.route("/tasks/<int:task_id>", methods=["DELETE"])
def delete_tasks(task_id):
    task = next((item for item in tasks if item["id"] == task_id), None)
    if task is None:
        return jsonify({"error": "Task not found"}), 404
    tasks.remove(task)
    return jsonify({"result": "Task deleted"}), 200

if __name__ == "__main__":
    app.run(debug=True)
```

Then open your terminal and run the following command from your project directory:
```bash
python3 app.py
```
Your REST API is now up and running on `http://127.0.0.1:5000`

## Testing Your API
You can test your API using tools like Postman or cURL.

### 1. List All Tasks

> You can use the following cURL command to list all the avaliable tasks:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can use the following cURL command to list all the available tasks:
```

Expected result:
```json
{
  "error": "Task not found"
}
```
We see that the JSON response returns the error `Task not found`, which indicates that the task doesn't exist in the list of tasks.

## Common Causes of API Request Failures
Now, let's explore scenarios where API requests might fail. API requests can fail for various reasons, including sending invalid requests. This could happen if an incorrect endpoint is used, if the JSON data is invalid, or if the request is made with an unsupported HTTP method. Let's examine some instances where API requests might fail.

**1. Invalid Endpoint**:
With the REST API that we built, we have the following valid API endpoints:
- `GET /tasks`: Retrieves a list of all available tasks
- `GET /tasks/<int:task_id>`: Retrieves a specific task by its ID
- `POST /tasks`: Creates a new task
- `PUT /tasks/<int:task_id>`: Updates a specific task by its ID
- `DELETE /tasks/<int:task_id>`: Deletes a specific task by its ID

If we send an API request to any endpoint that is not listed above, the request will fail with a `404` status code. For instance, let's try to get all the tasks with following cURL command:
```bash
curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/task
```

> Here, we have used `task` instead of `tasks` in our endpoint, which makes our endpoint invalid. With this request we get the following error with `404` status code.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Here, we have used `task` instead of `tasks` in our endpoint, which makes our endpoint invalid. With this request, we get the following error with `404` status code.
```

Invalid:
```json
{ key: "value" }
```
Valid:
```json
{ "key": "value" }
```
- **Single Quotes Instead of Double Quotes:** JSON strings must be enclosed in double quotes. Using single quotes will result in invalid JSON.
Invalid:
```json
{ 'key': 'value' }
```
Valid:
```json
{ "key": "value" }
```
- **Trailing Commas:** JSON does not allow trailing commas after the last element in an object or array. Including a comma after the last element will make the JSON invalid.
Invalid:
```json
{
  "key1": "value1",
  "key2": "value2",
}
```
Valid:
```json
{
  "key1": "value1",
  "key2": "value2"
}
```
- **Missing Comma Between Elements:** In JSON objects and arrays, elements must be separated by commas. Omitting a comma between elements will make the JSON invalid.
Invalid:
```json
{
  "key1": "value1"
  "key2": "value2"
}
```
Valid:
```json
{
  "key1": "value1",
  "key2": "value2"
}
```
- **Incorrect Data Types:** JSON supports several data types, including strings, numbers, objects, arrays, booleans, and null. Using an incorrect data type or a value that does not match the expected type can lead to invalid JSON.

> Invlaid:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Invalid:
```
